"And she hath spoken unto us, saying, 'Let not this light be extinguished, and let mine gifts unto thee guide thee from terrors of cold and dark night.' O, woe unto the nations of man! Woe unto us who have betrayed her, for we were without humility, and didst slay her… children as we lusted for gold."  Yav Merouldzas, an apocalyptic preacher and important theologian of the Keepers, speaking on the fall of the Crinian empire. Dutsas-Worship on Ledus Banum ________________ Overview While it goes without saying that the sun plays an important role in the lives of everyone who inhabits it, nowhere is this more acknowledged than in the temperate zones of the planet, whose magnificent cities stand in stark contrast to the frozen wastes that are found in the poles. To the people of these areas, the sun is seen as a literal protector, who shields them away from the miseries and harsh lifestyles found in the glacial ice, deserving of recognition and respect as a deity. While early religions centered around the worship of the sun initially appeared in scattered pockets of human settlement, the worship of the god Dutsas spread quickly with the rise of the Crinian empire. Although the Empire has since fallen, the faith has endured (Dutsas-Worship remains by technicality the largest religion on Ledus Banum), albeit a faith that has undergone much change. Although once there was only one church, and one doctrine - that of the Keepers of Her Flame - the faith has fragmented into dozens of sub-faiths, with long histories of tension and conflict between them. Of these, four distinct ‘groups’ can be identified with their different interpretations of how to honor Dutsas on earth. Religious Story TLDR: The universe was created by a bunch of evil demonic gods that love to kick puppies. A human woman named Avora killed a giant named Dutsas and ate his heart to liberate humanity, becoming the Goddess Dutsas. The sun shines because she is fighting the other Gods so much that it radiates life into Ledus Banum. Although the different branch-faiths of Dutsas-Worship hold their own variations on stories and legends, there are certain fundamental similarities between them - chief of which is the origin of their Goddess, Dutsas. The fact that the sun shines is explained that, far away, the Goddess Dutsas, is warring against demons in the heavens, and it is in the warm light of her righteous battle against evil that life is possible. Before Dutsas ascended to godhood, humanity lived in misery. Despite the humans being immortal, this was a curse, for they lived in complete darkness and cold. Never being able to cultivate the ground under their feet, they starved, and never being able to see, they spent their lives blind and ignorant. It was from this period that a woman known as Avora, who is the first true Human, lived. After seeing her fellow people being struck down and tortured by those who occupied the heavens for entertainment, Avora was the first one of her kind who had the audacity to dream of anything more than simply existing, and it was she who first raised a hand against the demons that tormented her people. It was then that the first spark was created, and from this, humanity had created light. The gods of this earth, who had toyed with humanity for near-eternity, feared what might happen, and so, they introduced rot and decay into this world, and urged the humans below to cast off this would-be usurper, in exchange for their immortality to be returned to them. However, with the first spark, humanity had learned so much more than fear - they learned hope, love, curiosity, and empathy. And so, although some tried to betray Avora (becoming demons in the process), humanity as a whole stood firm against such subversions, and in that small corner of light that burned in a realm of darkness, did the humans gather, and so did they proclaim Avora as their queen. For many years did the Gods and Humanity war on the earth below, with the former sending thousands of horrible beasts and tragedies upon humanity. Yet, with each monster that Avora slew, the world thawed. The final battle on Earth occurred when the Gods sent one of their own - a giant by the name of Dutsas - to the realm of the mortals below, and it was then that Avora and Dutsas did epic battle, until Dutsas was felled. As Dutsas collapsed, the embers of his decaying corpse burned through the icy lands, until finally, green had come to Ledus Banum. As Dutsas watched humanity spring up from the mountains and valleys that were made with Dutsas’s body hitting the ground, she looked up at the heavens and understood that humanity cannot suffer another attack from the Gods if it were to thrive. And so, she called those around her forth, carved out Dutsas’s heart, and she ate it. It was then that she consumed the power of a God and was to be known henceforth as Dutsas[1]. Before she left, she had instructed all of humanity to heed her words and instructions for how to live their lives in order to prevent the evil Gods from conquering Humanity. She instructed them to live virtuously and had entrusted “the most righteous of her children” the responsibility to guide their peers away from darkness, and to teach them the ways of the light. Branches Dutsas-Worship constitutes 55-70% of the population. Of Dutsas-Worshippers, 39% effectively belong to the Seekers, 27% to the Merouldists, 20% to the Kerdaghites, and 14% to the Eternals. ((not final statistics)) TLDR: Keepers emerge as the orthodox religious doctrine/central church due to support from the Criniains, and they adopt the belief that the Crinian tyrants are sun god descendants, in order to receive favored positions within the Empire. While Crinia was still around, they were basically the only religion allowed to spread significantly. The empire collapsed, and Keepers believe that they failed Dutsas, becoming apocalyptic. Everyone else says ‘no wtf, we’re not gonna die, she’d never let us die’ but that’s just hard cope, and hence 5 trillion years of religious division. While there are literal dozens, if not hundreds, of splinter-religions all under the umbrella of Dutsas-Worship, three or four of them may be considered as the ‘major’ constituencies of the Faith, by virtue of their political influence, the large numbers of their believers, and the impact that these groups . That is not to say that they are monoliths: with the exception of the Merouldists who are a singular church, the ‘groups’ encompass diverse schools of thought that happen to share a few recognizable similarities. They all have religious wingnut weirdos that they’re embarrassed by and who they try to hide in the basement or keep in the loony house. Merouldists (Keepers of the Flame of Her Eternal Queenship Dutsas of Humanity) - TLDR: Crinia has fallen. Billions must die. What is the most enduring legacy of the Crinians? Is it their legal institutions? The political legacy of a state that nearly encompassed all of Ledus Banum? Its cultural achievements? While scholars debate these aspects in their discussions, go into the country, where the populace are detached from these concepts, and you will find that if one thing had survived the collapse, it is the Faith. Although the Keepers have fallen from their glory days, they still maintain prestige as one of the last things that survived the collapse of Crinia - the church a symbol of continuity from the days past. When Dutsas says that she entrusts the light of the world to be kept by “the most righteous of her children”, the Keepers hold that it is in reference to her literal progeny before she ascended to godhood. As the most structured and hierarchical school of thought, the Keepers were once the only school of thought, as they quickly formed a relationship with the Crinian Tyrants, claiming that they are the blood descendants of Avora. During the glory days of Crinia, the Keepers enjoyed widespread acclaim amongst the elite, and millions of new (forcible) converts that came with every one of the empire’s conquests. Unfortunately, with the collapse of Crinia and the family, that leaves the Keepers not only with a tremendous loss of temporal power, but also religious cohesion: with the fall of the Empire and the death of its rulers, there are no descendants of Avora on this earth anymore. The collapse of the Crinian empire had produced a period of religious turmoil for the Keepers, for without Avora’s children, what is to become of the world? The conclusion they came to was such: humanity has failed the mission Dutsas entrusted them, and one day, humanity will suffer extinction because of it. This apocalyptic doctrine has earned the present-day Keepers the shorthand name of being “Merouldists” (after Yav Merould, the primary apocalyptic theologian responsible for these changes). While the Keepers have seen a sharp decline, due to the upspring of new strands of Dutsas-Worship, their devotion to Dutsas or the old way of faith has not waned, even if they are no longer the main strand of worship. In the memory of Avora’s beautiful children, do the Keepers guide humanity to delay the end of times by urging all to repent for their sins and to expel the demons living within themselves. While they recognize that their mission to save humanity will ultimately fail, they must at least try in order to honor the sacrifice of Dutsas and those who faithfully honored the covenant of the Crinians in the days past. Weirdos: Despite it being well established across Dutsas-Worship that all of Avora’s descendants, if she had any, are dead and despite the fact that reincarnation is not widely accepted in Dutsas-Worship, there are a handful of Merouldist branch cults claiming that their leaders are the children of Dutsas, whether as ‘spirits who have returned from Dutsas’s legions to save her children from imminent doom‘ or that they are purportedly immortal and that they have been guiding humanity from the shadows for millennia. Suffice to say, if the Keepers were still able to, they would have sent the Crinian Inquisition on their asses. Unfortunately, they are stretched too thin, so they can only really condemn them from afar, while urging people to see the true way of Dutsas and not be swayed by these charismatic demons in human skin, who are False Children of Avora. Even those that do not follow a False Child, there are still weirdos: some believe that it is not right to bring a child to a sinful world that is doomed to experience great suffering, and therefore occupy an anti-natalist position, relying purely on conversion to sustain their numbers. Seekers (Charters of Her Heavenly Course) - TLDR: Dutsas’s children are totally still out there and the Crinians were a bunch of demonic fakes, so we’re all still safe. I think. I really fucking hope so. God. I don’t know, fuck you. With the end of the Crinian tyrants, the far-flung regions of the former empire soon found themselves free of inquisitorial repression, and those priestly figures, who have long had to navigate the confusing waters between serving their own local people and the central church doctrine, suddenly found an unprecedented level of freedom to declare their own doctrines. And so, the one of the earliest of the splinter-faiths that emerged with the Crinian collapse were the Charters[2] - those who denounced the tyrants as usurpers of the title of Avora’s children, and who denounced the Merouldists as delusional to believe that the world is soon to end because the Crinians are no more. The Seekers argue that, as opposed to being able to trace descent from Avora from a single contiguous line, Dutsas’s children simply have not been born yet, and that it is the mission of all to create a perfect and virtuous society for the purpose of allowing someone “most righteous” to be born as Dutsas’s child and bring eternal light to the world. Much unlike the Keepers, the Seekers (named that way for the manner that they ‘seek’ to one day witness the true child of Dutsas) are not a centralized body, but rather a congregation of regional faiths that generally hold to the principle that Dutsas’s child shall come to the world and cast of darkness and night forevermore, bringing about a period of eternal warmth for humanity. Though there are some aspects of the Seekers’ governance that resemble that of the Keepers - such as the creation of certain ‘Orders’ for the purposes of spreading the doctrine - the Seekers fundamentally view the Crinians, as well as the Keepers who worship them as saints, to be demonic charlatans who seek to subject humanity to eternal darkness, and will vehemently deny any associations with either of the two. Having surpassed the Merouldists as the largest ‘religion’[3], the Seekers lack the complex organizational structures that allowed stable governance over the constituent peoples who profess belief in the Seekers. This had resulted in very messy internal tensions at times of international political tension as the nations’ Seeker communities pit themselves against each other, usually only stopped by teeth-clenched compromise before Seeker unity crumbles under the weight of dozens of accusations of Crinianism. More respecting of autonomy than the Keepers, the Charters are an incredibly diverse group by virtue of its size, to the point that its doctrine is inconsistent. As an example, some sections hold that the child of Dutsas can only be one of her daughters (as that was the form of Dutsas the first true Human), while others hold that it can only be one of her sons (arguing that when Armit-Dutsas ate the heart of Eri-Dutsas, her flesh is female, but she assumed the male spirit of Eri-Dutsas, and as such a true child of Dutsas must be of male spirit as well). Suffice to say, despite its numbers, the actual unity of the Seekers is unsteady at best, and nonexistent at worst. Despite this, however, there is some broader agreement on subjects such as relations with the other branches that allow for some semblance of uniformity. For instance, they all recognize the importance of presenting a united front against those such as the antiquated Keepers, (who they regard as devil-worshippers), the heretical Eternals (who they regard as self-worshippers), and the barbarian Kerdaghites (who they regard as worshiping nothing). Weirdos: Like the Meroudlists, the Seekers also have their problem with their own False Children of Dutsas, though it is less pronounced due to the non-apocalyptic nature of the Seekers. The bigger problem for the Seekers are the myriad of Iconoclasts who accuse existing Seeker chapters as being ‘Crinian’ in nature, which can mean anything from being too materialistic, too esoteric, too attached to temporal power, or too detached from political realities. Although the most radical cases are simply denounced as being crypto-Kerdaghites, the Seekers have to contend with an increasingly-numerous host of cults that just barely escape categorization of Iconoclasm. Eternals (Church of His Most Holy Eternity) - TLDR: You fools, Dutsas would never let his children be abandoned, nor be subject to the rule of demons. The Crinians were once virtuous, but they lost their way and became demons, as made evident by their collapse and the success of those who opposed them. I’m so rich and wealthy - it must be because Dutsas loves me and hates poor people. While the Seekers have dealt with centuries of division, it has miraculously managed to somehow remain together, with only a few schisms in its history, with fewer ‘splitters’ surviving any more than a few decades. However, one instance lies amongst all the failures. The exception to the ex-Seeker faiths who failed to become prominent in their own right is also one of the Seekers’ earliest splits: the Holy Eternity. The actual schism between the Holy Eternity and the Charters are unclear, though scholars of history hypothesize that it was initially an ordinary disagreement on the nature of the spirit of Armit-Dutsas as male or female[4] (those who would become the Keepers held the minority view that the spirit of the Sun God is male), it eventually escalated to some regionalist infighting that resulted in the formation of the Eternals, and the crystallization of their own philosophy as an alternative to the Seekers. Initially, the Keepers had sought to capitalize on this schism by trying to ‘re-invite’ the Eternals to the true path of worship, but soon learned that the Eternals still held onto the heretical belief that the last of the Crinian tyrants were demons. While they have not gone so far as to declare that all the Crinians were not Dutsas’s true children and were therefore evil demons who lied about their origins, they nevertheless have adopted a nuanced approach with regards to the doctrine of Righteous Governance (that which is endorsed by the Solar God Dutsas). The argument is that Dutsas the God is a being of spirit, and therefore is male (having ‘transcended’ the female form that he was born with), means that any definition of a child of Dutsas must be taken in purely spiritual terms, as Dutsas is not concerned with Avorite flesh, but Dutsasian spirit. Furthermore, Dutsas, as a spirit who has power over this world, simultaneously defends it from evil in both the earth and in the heavens. Therefore, the natural way of Righteous Governance is the way that is blessed with fortune, as is the will of Dutsas. To put it in other words, if a ruler comes to be known as the most splendent, the most magnanimous, the mightiest and the greatest, then they shall be known as the child of Dutsas, for he has given unto them his blessings, and it is through his grace that their rule is a great one. Conversely, if one finds ruin, then it is because that Dutsas, as the only one who can truly see past the lies of demons, recognizes where they lie, and so acts upon this world to bring about the downfall of demonic rulers and protect humanity. In their early years, the glory of the Crinians meant that they truly were the children of Dutsas, but later down the line, the Crinians became little else than demons, and so Dutsas had engineered their downfall, letting others strive to take their place as her children. In the simplest of terms - the Holy Eternity believes that richer and more powerful you are, the more blessed you must be in the eyes of Dutsas, for the very fact that you are rich or powerful is the will of Dutsas. It goes without saying who their target demographic is, even if the doctrine of the Eternals somehow makes its way to the lower masses. Weirdos: We’re bringing back the Olikost cult who think women don’t exist. Kerdaghites (The Inner Faith) - TLDR - God I really, really, really wanna cave in some blueblood faces right now and bathe in their blood. I am so normal. If there is only one thing that the other three branches of Dutsas-Worship can agree on - apart from the fundamentals such as the fact that Dutsas is keeping the demons at bay - it is that they all hate the Kerdaghites. The Inner Faith is actually the first major group that had split from the Keepers with the collapse of Crinia, having separated even before the Seekers did. A mystic belief, the Inner Faith was founded by a lowly preacher who is known by the name of Kerdagh. While new interpretations of Dutsas-Worship sprung up in the years to come, such as the Seekers, the Kerdaghites are extremely notable not only for their mystic form of worship of Dutsas, but also by the fact that theirs is the most radical departure from the orthodoxy established by the Keepers. This is because the core fundamental teaching of the Kerdaghites that makes their followers the most diehard believers, and the same teaching that makes them near-universally hated by the rest of Dutsas-Worship, is that humanity as a whole are all Dutsas’s “most righteous” and that those who claim some natural power over others are demons trying to divide humanity and prevent them from realizing their true selves as Dutsas’s children. Due to this very populistic view of Dutsas, association with the Kerdaghite sect was effectively prohibited by many of the states that had immediately succeeded Crinia, ostensibly because of their purported belief that each member of humanity has ‘the spirit of Dutsas’ inside themself, but more than likely because their religious doctrine was antithetical to their authority. It was in this environment that the teachings of Kerdagh and the Inner Faith were spread only in secret and under the risk of death. More recently, however, with some easing of traditional religious restriction and the decline of organized religious power, the Kerdaghites are beginning to increase their numbers. Though they still are not as large as say the Seekers or Merouldists in terms of numbers, they maintain a great deal of zeal that few of their non-Kerdaghite peers have. It is this zeal that has permitted them to endure centuries of religious struggle, surviving to the present day, when the other faiths must recognize that it can no longer exterminate Kerdagh’s teachings, and to accept (begrudgingly) the existence of the Inner Faith as a major sect. Weirdos: Though a minority, the segment of ‘neo-Kerdaghites’ are often used as an example by religious rivals of the broader Kerdaghite sect to represent their radicalism and departure from traditional understandings of Dutsas. While most Kerdaghites actually still believe that the sun is the result of what is primarily Dutsas’s war against evil (assisted by the spirits of human deceased), the neo-Kerdaghites hold that Dutsas’s significance is only bestowed by her being the ‘first’ human, with no other distinction of authority or power beyond that. The sun, therefore, is the result of millions of human souls warring against evil, rather than the effort of one solar goddess. The neo-Kerdaghites are also even more anti-authority than most of their Kerdaghite brothers, holding that any authority (even those created voluntarily, rather than just those that are unjust) ‘chains’ us from seeing Dutsas and the ancestors by keeping ourselves ‘rooted’ in worldly affairs. Misc. Beliefs & Practices  There are many supernatural entities that occupy this realm of existence. They have created the universe, and hold tremendous power over it. Of them, only one - Dutsas the Sun Goddess (the only one not born as a god, and the only one who was once a human) - is benevolent. All gods, with the exception of Dutsas, are evil demonic invaders who seek to destroy life as we know it, being held back through Dutsas’s eternal war against them. These demons are not only in the heavens, but they are also found on earth, as they use all manner of trickery, whether scheming in the dark, possessing the bodies of the innocent, or taking the form of humans. Dutsas entrusted “the most righteous of her children” to safeguard humanity from the demons on earth, while she herself fights them in the heavens. The different definitions of who exactly these “children” are is the most fundamental difference between the branch-religions. It is inconceivable that a human can be evil, as everyone has benefited from the common gift of Dutsas. If evil visibly exists through human action, then the explanation is that the perpetrators are not human at all, but rather demons in human form. If you were to ‘convert’ a bad person to become good, the explanation then is that a demon possessed their body, but through the power of faith, you expelled it, and the person returned to the collective spirit of humanity. When a person dies, they join Dutsas in the heavens, where they fight an eternal war against evil, and let life continue after them. The sun becomes a little brighter with their contribution. As all are joined together in the common blood of humanity, the dead will have already been forgiven of any and all misdeeds through their fight against the demons in the heavens. The moon is a controversial topic. While the Kerdaghites hold that the sun and the moon are one and the same, the other three major sects hold that the moon is subordinate to the sun, and the moon is only the spirits of the dead fighting the demons. The sun, according to them, is Dutsas in the sky, with the added presence of the spirits. Although those who live out in the frozen wastes aren’t necessarily evil by that single fact alone, we should still be cautious due to the fact that they live very close to where demons may make their residence. Some take it to the next level with the racism, though. Religious festivals usually occur at night-time, and almost always feature fire, lanterns, or some other source of light/warmth. This represents the shared effort of humanity at ‘pushing away’ the cold dark and the demons that reside in it. The solar solstice is a widely-anticipated event, because although the sun is blocked, it always eventually comes back to shine over the land, which is interpreted to be a representation of how Dutsas will always triumph over those who would wish to keep humanity in darkness. Although it has not been a requirement for quite some time now, it is not unheard of for priests of Dutsas-Worship to blind themselves in order to ‘fight against the darkness’ for the rest of their life. These ‘Seers’[5] are then placed into a dark room, don robes covering their face and entire body, and maintain a central fire. Many of these Seers spend the rest of their lives in this self-imposed state of darkness, never letting the fire burn out. ________________ [1] To distinguish between Dutsas the giant who sought to subjugate humanity and Dutsas the Goddess who sought to liberate it, the terms ‘Eri-Dutsas’ and ‘Armit-Dutsas’ may be used. However, ‘Dutsas’ by default usually refers to the Sun Goddess. [2] The term does not refer to any documental ‘charter’, but rather the persons who collectively ‘chart’ the course towards the birth of Dutsas’s child. [3] Whether or not the branches (such as Merouldists or the Seekers) constitute different religions remains a source of debate. While there is no shortage of partisans on each side arguing that theirs is the true religion, and the rest are irreconcilably-evil demonic charlatans who worship darkness, others may instead adopt the view that the others are misguided comrades of the same belief in Dutsas. [4] See the section on the Charters for more information. It is unlikely that the male-female distinction of Dutsas was the ultimate source of the schism, as disagreements on the same exact subject continue within the Charters. [5] Named as such due to ‘seeing’ the fight against Darkness, rather than any ability to predict the future or to receive visions from any divine figure. Claims of holding the latter powers are broadly rejected by mainstream believers of Dutsas-Worshippers as demonic magic given by the gods to undermine humanity and Dutsas.